Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Mauricio Suarez. He is
full professor in logic and philosophy of Science at
Universidad Complutense de Madrid. He's also a life member
at Claire Hall at Cambridge University, and today we're
going to talk about his book Inference and Representation,
A Study in Modeling Science. So, Doctor Suarez, welcome
to the show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I'm very pleased to
be here finally. It took us some time to
arrange this, but we finally made it.
Thank you. Yes, that, that's true. That's true. So
let me first ask you about uh modeling. Uh,
WHAT is the practice of modeling in science?
Um, YES, the practice of modeling in science is,
um, the way scientists throughout all disciplines, um, go
about constructing hypothetical, imaginative, or fictional scenarios in order
to compare to real systems targets that they're interested
in studying in the world and to gain some
information about those systems. So it is. It is
a central practice in contemporary scientific activity across all
kinds of different fields, and it doesn't um attempt
to study nature, um, or society, the objects of
the study, um, directly, but by means of constructing.
This hypothetical or imaginative or fictional scenarios that are
then compared with the real systems and knowledge can
be acquired. Uh, BY means of these comparisons.
And what is a model? I mean, what, what
does that mean in science?
Uh, YEAH, that's a different question. Um, THAT'S a
question in the ontology of models. The first question
that you asked me was a question about practice,
and one can answer that question by looking at
the phenomenology of scientific activity and practice. The second
question that you asked me is a more philosophical
question and perhaps surprisingly, it's a harder question to
answer. I mean, the, the first question. It is
relatively easy to answer because we just have to
look at the practice and the practice is very
much a given. But models are not a given.
We have to philosophically interpret them in order to
come up with an answer to that question. What
are models? Um, AND it turns out that no
single philosophical answer to this question has been very
good, um, to be frank, there have been lots
of different philosophical attempts to come up with an
answer, and all of them have some, uh, issues
or limitations of one sort or another. Perhaps the
simplest answer is to say that a model is
a description. But that really doesn't tell you much
because then you have to ask a description of
what and how does it describe a model what
it describes, and that gets you into the heart
of the philosophical problem with representation. So, I don't
think we have a very good answer to the
question what models are. Um, IT'S quite clear that
there are many things that can play the role
of models from equations to linguistic descriptions to contraptions
and real physical objects to imaginative scenarios and thought
experiments. They all can play the role of models,
and there is not a single thing that identifies
or cuts across. All of those. So, uh, in,
in part, um, my project has been for some
time now to come up with a functional answer
to the question of what models are rather than
answering the question directly and giving you a definition
of what the model is abstractly, which I think
has not been a very successful project. I prefer
to give you a definition of what models are.
In the practice of modeling, which is uh something
that is much more accessible and easier. To contemplate
and study and so I try to come up
with um a purely functional definition of what a
model is in terms of what it does for
us, which is to allow us to investigate the
world in the way that I described in my
answer to the first question.
And then in the book you talk about what
you call the modeling attitude. What is that and
how did it emerge in the 19th century?
Yes, so I mean this really gets us already
going into the project because the whole I wrote
a whole chapter. The second chapter, which is devoted
to the historical background to the philosophical analysis of
present-day scientific modeling. Um, THERE has been modeling in
science, and there have been models in science, um,
for as long as there has been science. Um,
Galileo famously constructed models, so did Kepler. But they
were not in any way dominant or a dominant
part of science. They only become a dominant or
central part of scientific activity. At the end of
the 19th century. So, the modeling attitude is this
very prevalent and dominant way of doing science by
means of this construction of imaginative hypothetical fictional scenarios
that I was talking about at the beginning, which
only becomes really dominant and central to the way
we do science. Um, IN the 20th century. So
it's a really fin de sela development and it's
really with the start of the 20th century that
we can start talking about a central modeling attitude
on the part of scientists. Scientists gain this attitude
of doing science by means of the construction. OF
models. So I, I go into some details of
this history. And I find a number of locations
throughout Europe, throughout the 19th century where this modeling
attitude becomes dominant, particularly around the work of um
James Clerk Maxwell and the Maxwellians in Victorian Britain
in the second half of the 19th century, and
then slightly later, but really pretty much simultaneously in,
in the German lands, particularly around the schools in
Berlin and Um, Vienna, um, both around Hermann von
Helmholtz and, uh, Ludwig, uh, um, Boltzmann. Um, IN
Vienna at the turn of the century, um, there
are a couple of very signaling events, um, both
in Britain and then later on, um, the publication
of, um, uh, and a very famous and influential
entry. In the Encyclopaedia Britannica by Boltzmann entitled Models,
which is published in 1900 at the turn of
the century, um, which signals the dominance of the
modeling attitude. So it has two cultural sources. Um,
THAT are predominant, but it's really happening all throughout
Europe. It happens in France, it happens in Italy,
it happens everywhere where scientific activity takes place that
this, uh, modeling attitude, this attitude of building models
in order to investigate phenomena becomes, uh, prevalent, and
I think the history is important because it gives
us clues as to how to understand the notion.
So, um, what I undertake in that chapter in
the book is uh If you want, you could
call it a philosophical history of the present, uh,
the present day condition in science which has a
history and I go to doing a bit of
genealogy of that, and I happen to be one
of those philosophers who think, who thinks that you
can only really understand the philosophical debate or position
if you understand the history and in this case.
I think it's very obvious that the history is
incredibly informative for how we should think about uh
models and, and, um, nowadays. So, it has a
history, it has a very precise history with precise
locations and scientists who take on this particular way
of doing science and then it spreads out very
quickly and eventually becomes very dominant.
Um, LET me ask you now about representation in
the philosophy of science, when exactly did people start
thinking more about the concept of representation?
This is a very good question, um, because you
would have thought that representation would always have been
a topic of philosophical interest, and there is a
sense in which it always was a topic of
philosophical interest, but, um, during the, the, the years
of dominance of formal philosophy and the um Dominance
of logical positivism, particularly in North America. I think
the concept was somewhat relegated, um, and that may
have had to do with the fact that for
the logical positivists, the fundamental notions of analysis were
linguistic and particularly um descriptive, um, and representation is
a more general concept. Um, SO for a long
time, philosophers didn't really care much about this concept.
And so you find a paradox that for instance
in the 1970s and 1980s, philosophers of science barely
touch the topic and there is no established topic
of scientific representation in the curriculum is in no
way a canonical topic, still nowadays remains perhaps slightly
outside the canon, um. Yet in other areas of
philosophy, for instance, in the philosophy of art, representation
is the central concept which every philosopher of art
has something to say about in the 1970s, in
the 1980s, in the 1990s. So, uh, something happens,
um, in the second half of the 20th century
in philosophy of science where representation as a topic
gets suppressed in some ways. Um, IT comes back
to the fore, um, mainly through renewed interest by
philosophers of science or modeling. Um, WHICH is, uh,
something that philosophers take up in the 1990s, really.
And once we take up that interest, we connect
with previous philosophical discussions of modeling that there were
at the beginning of the 20th century around figures
like Pierre Duhaim and Henry Poincare here as in
many other areas, a real pioneer, um, and later
on Campbell, uh, in, in England, and then some
minor figures, um. During the 50s and 60s that
were at the time considered marginal like Max Black
and Mary Hesse, who did uh write extensively about
models but were not uh regarded as canonical figures
in the field, but who have been rehabilitated in
the last 20 or 30 years precisely because of
this new interest on, on representation. So it has
um And an interesting history of its own, the
concept of representation in the philosophy of science because
um it has suffered waves of interest and disinterterest
um throughout the history and I think it's interesting
to study the philosophy of science through the lens
of what philosophers of science do with the concept.
Um, AT some point, um, they are centrally occupied
with it. Later on, they become very much disinterested
in it. And in the last 20 or 30
years, the topic has emerged again with renewed uh
force and vigor, and it's now one of the
central topics of research for philosophers of science and
I think again, possibly becoming canonical again.
And what is representation exactly?
OK. I mean this is you have to read
my book to get the answer to the full
answer to this question, um, so, um, representation is
um A, a concept, a notion that we use
to describe the way, the different ways in which
in different areas of knowledge and particular in science,
uh, people get on with ways to characterize the
reality around them. Now, There is a traditional, very
old, um, ancient really way of thinking of representation
as a sort of Mimsis or copy of the
reality. One way in which we go about representing
reality is by copying it, um, identifying its fundamental
elements and producing some sort of copy. Um, OF
it as kind of mirror image of the reality
and this has been, this is an ancient thought.
But it's been crit also critic criticized very strongly
also since antiquity. I mean it's had its defenders
and its critics ever since it was born possibly
with Plato. Um, AND nowadays, uh, we, we think,
I think the consensus is that any sort of
attempt to get on with the concept of representation
by means of any mirroring metaphor is very limited.
And encounters very important fundamental problems. But basically, that's
what representation is. It's a, it's a concept. Um,
THAT we use and apply to every attempt to
provide a characterization of the surrounding reality that helps
us manage in some ways and get to know
that reality.
AND what are the most prominent accounts of scientific
representation?
Uh, WELL, as I was mentioning before, um, interest
in this notion is, is relatively new in the
philosophy of science of the last, uh, century or
so, um, and this is an evolving, uh, field,
so there are new accounts springing up, um, almost,
uh, as we speak, uh, on a monthly basis.
It's a very rich, uh, lively and dynamic. FIELD
of research. I would divide all the accounts of
representation and this is something I do in the
book um into two kinds. Uh WHAT I Accounts
of representation and what I call deflationary accounts of
representation. The substantive accounts of representation try to attempt
to get to grips with the with the concept
of representation by defining it, essentially providing a set
of sufficient and necessary conditions for the concept and
in so doing reducing it to other concepts that
we may think are easier to comprehend or to
understand. Since, as I mentioned, representation itself is a
complex. A concept, you may think that one way
of going philosophically about it is to try to
reduce it to a simpler concept or set of
concepts, and that's what a substantive account would on
the whole try to do. And there are a
number of different accounts that fit the bill here.
There have been people who have claimed that representation
can be reduced to similarity of relations between model
sources and model targets. And there are people who
have uh employed the structuralist notions derived from morphism
or isomorphisms of some sort in order to characterize
this substantive relation. In all these cases, the, the,
the idea in the background of these attempts is
that representation is complex and um. Very hard to
understand and you try to analyze it or reduce
it to concepts that are easier to understand, such
as similarity or or isomorphism. Um, I, I think
all these attempts to reduce the concept of representation
encounter uh what I now regard that as insurmountable
difficulties and I don't think any of them really
works. To the satisfaction of the proponents. The other
kind of um account, um, is a deflationary account,
and this is an account that doesn't necessarily try
to define the notion. Um, THERE are many concepts
that we employ in ordinary life and in our
cognitive lives that we don't know how to define.
And there's a whole philosophical tradition that claims that
no concept except very recondite concepts in the formal
senses can be fully analyzed in this way, um.
And a deflationist, um, would approach the concept of
representation in this spirit instead of trying to analyze
it away in terms of simpler concepts, the deflationist
thinks that representation is not in fact such a
complex concept, but it is related to the phenomenology
of the practice of model building that we discussed
uh at the beginning of the interview. And so
therefore it's, um, in some ways a given. It
is a given in the way that we do
things that we employ representations. And we can only
really say some very general things about the concept
and then the philosophical task that remains to do
is not to analyze it but to see how
it works in practice and to study the practice
and you know it's a splendid variety and trying
to draw as many general lessons as we can
from the practice about how we use um representations.
So deflationist tends to Um, to favor the study
of the practice while the substantivist would tend to
favor the analysis of the concept, um, and, uh,
and, and there are two very different approaches to
this field, um, just as there are different substantivist
accounts, there are also different deflationist accounts. Uh, I
have proposed one, but there are other, and there
are other versions of this different accounts that circulate
in the literature that can be. Uh, MADE or
read in other place or spirit. So I think
there is quite a range of accounts that are
acceptable and that one could choose from, um. Mine
is not necessarily the only one, although I claim
some virtues for it, but there are other accounts
of representation that, as I mentioned before, are deflationist
in the sense that they put the practice first
and they try to study the practice ahead of
trying to analyze the concept in any abstract way.
In the book at a certain point, you talk
about the distinction between the means and the constituent
of scientific representation. Uh, WHAT is that distinction and
why does it matter?
Yeah, good. Um, SO, this, this distinction, um, has
a role to play in the assessment of the
different accounts of representation. I introduced it explicitly in
the book. I mean, it, it originates uh with
me for Uh, for good or bad, it originates
with me. Um, AND I introduced it in order
to, uh, produce some sort of assessment of the
different accounts of representation. Um, THE constituent of representation
is the relation, if there is one, between sources
and targets in virtue of which, uh, a model
is a representation of its target. So it's basically
the defining conditions in this analytical spirit of the
substantive, uh, accounts to representation of the notion of
representation. Now defenders of the substantivist accounts of representation
would claim that there is a constituent to representation
and moreover, it's a substantive one that allows us
to understand the concept. I claim in the book
that there is no substantive constituent of the uh
concept of representation. We can at best express some
very general platitudes of how the concept is employed
in practice and that's as much as we can
say about the constituents. So I have a very
thin. Account of the constituent of representation, but this
needs to be distinguished from the means of any
given representation which is the relation between source and
targets. That scientists will utilize in the context of
their practice in order to draw conclusions about the
targets on the basis of the source of the
representation. These are the means of the different sets
of representations that we find uh across the different
sciences, and scientists will employ very many different such
relations in different contexts. Now, varieties or types of
similarity may play a role in some contexts, a
stronger or weaker forms. Varieties or types of morphism
could play a role as means of the representational
relation in different contexts. Um, THERE are different kinds
of morphisms that could play that role, but then
there are other, uh, relations such as instantiation, which,
uh, is one possible relation between a model and
its target, uh, that cannot be reduced to either
similarity or isomorphism, and I claim those also can
play and often play a role. So you have
a variety of means that all play a role
in different cases in different representations. Um So, um,
I use the distinction between means and constituents to
defend my account, which is minimal or minimalist with
respect to the constituents. And pluralist with respect to
the means of representation, claiming that there are very
many different means that can play a legitimate role
in order to mediate or facilitate the functional ends
of representational models in sciences.
Mhm. Uh, TELL us then how this distinction between
the means and the constituent, the constituent of scientific
representation then grounds a clear division of labor between
epistemic and conceptual dimensions of representation.
Yeah, that's a great question too. Um, SO, um,
So for a, for a long time, I think
when people thought about representation, they had in mind
representation of success. That is the ways in which
models may accurately characterize their targets. And so in
philosophers' minds, I think for a long time the
question of what are the conditions for representational success
and what are the conditions for representation simpliciter. We
conflated. It's only in the last 20 or 30
years that we've, I think, very successfully disentangled these
two sets of conditions. So, nowadays, I think every
philosopher working on On the topic, I think Buddha
accept this distinction. Um, THERE are representations which are
not particularly successful or accurate. There are very inaccurate
representations of target systems, and throughout history we've seen
them. Um, PLAY a role in the history and
the development of science. Um, There are certain models
that we take to be accurate characterizations of their
systems and we end up discovering that they're not
so accurate. Um, 11 could, for instance, take the
succession of models of the solar system or the
planetary system throughout the history of the last 2000
years as a brilliant series of examples of models
that turn out not to be particularly accurate, um,
and for all kinds of different reasons contain inaccuracies
and make false statements about their target system. Starting
with, of course, the geocentric, uh, Aristotelian model that
put the Earth at the center of the universe,
something that we know nowadays to be false, um,
so one has to distinguish the conditions for a
representation, something to be a model. And the conditions
for it to be an accurate, truthful, or faithful
representation. They must be distinct because most models involve
misrepresentations of all kinds. Um, ON these grounds, a
division of labor between, um, epistemic and conceptual dimensions
of our analysis, um, representations of epistemic or cognitive
value when they, uh, provide at least partially accurate
descriptions of their target systems, um, but they're nonetheless
conceptually valid. Even if they're not accurate or even
if they're completely inaccurate in all kinds of different
respects, there are still representations of their target systems
and so therefore we need a different account of
representation uh than we need uh an account of
accurate representation. My distinction between means and constituents allows
me to do this very easily because the constituent
of representation takes as it were, charge of the
conceptual side. While the um uh study of the
different means of representation in practice takes care of
the different ways in which people can, uh, and
scientists can judge their models to be accurate or
faithful. Um, SO there, there certainly is nowadays a
division of labor and a clear distinction between accurate
representation and representation simpliciter, and every philosopher working on
the topic nowadays accepts. That an account of representation
must make room for misrepresentation in all its different
varieties. Yes,
and how does it then lead to a distinction
between successful representation and the more general category of
representation?
Yes, I mean that, that question speaks, I mean,
I, in a way I've already answered that question
because that question speaks exactly to the distinction between
representation simpliciter. Um, WHICH can be very inaccurate. Um,
IT can be maximally inaccurate. A representation could get
not a single fact right about its target and
it nonetheless is a representation of its target. If
it's intended use is to convey information about the
target, and as I mentioned before, the history of
science is full of examples of this sort. If
you take the original Ptolemaic models of the solar
system. There's barely any statement that you can deduce
from those models that we nowadays would think of
as a true statement. Um, Nonetheless, they are very
clearly representations of the solar system. That's their intended
use, that's how they were created and that's how
we must interpret them even nowadays when we know
them to be maximally false. So, um. So this
is really important to people working on the field
at the moment that we distinguish very carefully between
successful representation and the conditions that must obtained for
a representation to be successful from representation simpliciter, which
need not be successful. Um, uh, SO representation is
not, uh, to put it technically in philosopher's jargon.
Representation is not a success term. You can represent
something and do it very poorly, um, with very
little. Um, SUCCESS just as you can have all
kinds of beliefs and the beliefs could be false,
um, and people make this distinction between knowledge being
a success term, belief not being one, and you
could say that nowadays I'd say. Everyone working on
this, uh, topic accepts that representation is a bit
like belief and unlike knowledge, it's not a success
term.
You, you criticize reductive naturalist theories of scientific representation.
What are these kinds of theories and what do
you think are their flaws?
So these are the theories that attempt to reduce
the concept of representation by providing some substantive um
reactive basis and a definition of representation in terms
of that basis. And the two main ideas that
have been discussed in this area throughout the years
are similarity and different variants of similarity. Um, AND,
uh, isomorphism or morphism and different kinds of morphism,
uh, that may operate between targets and sources, um.
Now, it's um. A complex issue, what the relations
between those two are. There are people who think
that. Um, ISOMORPHISM is nothing but a kind of
similarity, and there are people who think that all
similarities must be understood to be underpinned by some
sort of a structural. Uh, MORPHISM, um, but the
emphasis has been put in placed differently on the
different concepts by defenders. Of the, of the role
of these concepts in the notion of representation, so
I think it's legitimate. To talk about two broad,
broader families, two broad families of um substantive or
reductive naturalist accounts, the similarity account and the isomorphism
account. Now, in the book, I criticize these accounts
and I put forward a number of arguments. Um,
AGAINST them. These are old arguments, um, which I've
been rehearsing, uh, not just me, but other philosophers
of science have also been elaborating for some time
now, for about 20 years. Um, AND what I
do in the book is to try to, um,
Take balance of the debate on, on these arguments
over the last 20 years. I think the arguments
have been very successful at dismantling um philosopher's confidence
in this productive naturalist accounts. Um, uh, I think
it would be very difficult nowadays to argue for
any of these reductive naturalist accounts. Um, THERE are
5 different types of arguments that I study in
the book. Um, MAYBE the most powerful ones are
the logical argument and the misrepresentation argument. The misrepresentation
argument is connected to what we've just been talking
about, the fact that many representations. If not all,
um, misrepresent in very definite ways their targets and
this is hard for similarity and isomorphism accounts to,
um, to explain. Um, THEY have different ways to
try to explain them, these failures of representation of
rep full or accurate representation, but none of them
are fully convincing, I think. Um, THE other argument
is a logical argument that simply points out The
representation in science and elsewhere. Is a directed relationship
from sources targets. It's not symmetric. It's not reflexive.
Nothing that represents something represents itself. This is very
rare, um, and it's not transitive. You can have
something represents something else which in turn represents something
else and that doesn't turn the first into a
representation of the third. Um, AND this is easy
to see operating in the phenomenology of representation in
science and in art, but very difficult for similarity
and isomorphism accounts. To um To account and to
fit. Um, SO it becomes a really um very
important um argument against uh this uh reductive naturalist
or substantivist accounts.
And what would be then alternative non-reductive views?
Yes, these are the deflationary accounts that I was
talking about at the beginning. And these are accounts
from which one doesn't. Invest oneself philosophically in the
reduction of the concept of representation. Um, And that's
partly because one doesn't find it so problematic to
begin with. And the reason why one doesn't find
it so problematic to begin with is connected to
the pragmatism and the phenomenology of the practice that
I was discussing at the beginning of the interview.
If you are convinced that the practice is a
given and it's accessible and it's reasonably well understood.
Then from a pragmatist point of view, um, you
don't really have a big conundrum to answer about
the concept of representation. The concept is operative in
practice. And that should be enough um for us
philosophers. It gives us a lot of work to
do because we have to now study this practice,
um, but the work that we have to do
is not of a conceptual kind and it doesn't
begin with big puzzles about this obscure notion representation,
um. So, on, on this deflationary accounts, which I
think all of them in some way or another
tend towards pragmatism because they do begin with this
description of the practice and they begin with the
assumption that the representation is not a very difficult
concept that requires an analysis, but a simple concept
that appears in our practice very prominently, uh, but
just like, um, I don't know, the concept of
a table or a chair appear in our practice
and they don't demand a very deep philosophical analysis.
Um, THE practice of using those objects may demand
the philosophical scrutiny, uh, but the concept itself doesn't.
So, so a deflationist thinks that representation is just
like one of these ordinary concepts, and there's nothing
mysterious about it. There's nothing that requires us to
come up with a deep philosophical theory that analyzes
the concept, but we have philosophical work to do
in understanding the way in which we use it,
this concept in practice. And any deflationary account begins
with this, I think. Uh, MINE is 1, I
offer it as a possible account of representation from
this pragmatist perspective. And this is the idea that
we focus on the way in which models and
representations are used as tools for surrogative inference, a
kind of inference that takes us from sources to
targets, which is part and parcel of the practice
as given, and that, that should be our starting
point. And then we should scrutinize the practice in
order to shed philosophical light on it. But we
shouldn't try to analyze the concept any, in any
other more significant way. There are other approaches to
representation that are deflationary, um, from this point of
view, I think are acceptable and rather legitimate and
can overcome the objections. Um, MINE is not the
only one. SO there are some approaches that appeal
to other notions such as demonstration or denotation or,
um. Um, INTERPRETATION, and if you understand those notions
to be as part of the practice, which I
think one can do, those, um, accounts also in,
in my view are legitimate. Um, SO I'm not
saying mine is the only one, but I do
think that these accounts that begin with the study
of the practice are significantly better. As it, um,
as it turns out in trying to understand philosophically,
um, the way modeling works in science and how
representation generalizes to other areas of inquiry, they're significantly
better as starting points than any substantive reductive naturalist
account.
So tell us then about your inferential conception of
scientific representation.
Yeah, so my, my conception is one of this
inflationary. Accounts that I think are survived the criticisms
and in, in the case of, of my approach,
what I do is that I put one feature
of uh representation um and undeniably one feature of
scientific modeling that is ever present in the practice
of modeling, which is uh a kind of inference
that we call surrogate inference. And this is the
sort of inference, logical inference if you want, um,
that takes you from facts about the source and
its description, the source of the model may be
an equation or some kind of fictional scenario or
um hypothesis. You study how that equation or scenario
hypothesis is structured and what sort of claims it's
making. And then you draw inferences from those facts
to claims that you make about the target system,
and the target system could be any system you're
interested in, maybe the evolution of a population in
biology or as we were saying before, the movement
of the planets in the solar system. So, a
representation primarily what it does for you, a model
in science what it primarily does for you is
to facilitate those sorts of inferences across from the
source system to the target system. That's called technically
in the literature surrogative inference. So, my, my approach
to representation puts that feature of practice which As
far as I know, it's universal. I having encountered,
and I've been studying this area for more than
20 years, and I haven't encountered yet an instance
of a model that doesn't allow for surrogative reasoning
and I think, well, I think I've convinced my
peers that this must be a central feature of
any modeling activity and in my, in, in the
case of my conception, this is the only indispensable
feature. Of the practice um of modeling and therefore,
um, on my account it becomes the only constituent
of the notion of representation because it's the only
universally instantiated feature in the practice. And as I
mentioned before, I'm not interested in a substantive analysis
of the concept. I think as philosophers, we are
better off analyzing the practice of representing. Um, AND
this is the only feature that I can see
in the practice that plays a universal, uh, role.
So, so that's why I call it the inferential
conception. Because I claim that surrogative inferences a fundamental
feature of um of the scientific practice of modeling.
This has to be supplemented with another condition which
supplies the directionality of representations because you can have
surrogate um inferences that are valid to very many
indiscriminate number of target systems, but we typically only
select one. And so it has to be supplemented
with something I call force, which is the way
in which uh scientists would select in the practice
a particular given target for the source. Um, ONCE
you have both of these features instantiated in a,
in a practice, in a scientific practice, you are
in a sense studying, uh, modeling practice, um, because
those are the only two necessary conditions that would,
um, turn, uh, a piece of or an activity,
um, in science into a modeling activity. So, so
this is in essence the inference of conception. It
is the kind of deflationary approach. To the notion
of representation that locates um as a universal component
of the practice of model building and representing this
um activity of inference drawing um of of a
surrogate surative kind between sources and intended targets.
Mhm. I have one last question then, one last
topic I'd like to explore here. How does an
exploration of scientific representation connect to debates on artistic
representation?
Yeah, yes, I mean, I, I think there's definitely
a connection. Um, AND moreover, I defend him in
my book that this is a connection that philosophers
of science. SHOULD be concerned with and should pay
attention, handsome attention to. And I mount an argument
for this, and it is one strong conviction of
mine. And in fact, I plan to do more
work on this in the future. Um, THAT philosophers
of science have a lot to learn from philosophers
of art. And now, As you can imagine, this
is slightly contentious because Philosophers of science would like
to think that they are more important than than
other philosophers and to be told that they have
to pay attention to what philosophers of art have
been doing for 50 years is to be told
that they maybe haven't been paying attention to the
right topics, but I think this is actually true,
and I, I, I, I. I think this goes
back to something that we discussed at the beginning
of the interview, which is that Um for different
contingent historical reasons, I think philosophers of science were
not very preoccupied with the notion of representation for
a long time. Um AND in particular in the
70s and 80s, there was a scant. Philosophical attention
paid in philosophy of science circles to this notion.
While simultaneously there was an explosion of work in
the philosophy of art. Which was then a nascent
and growing field of philosophy. Uh, ALL of it
was centered around the notion of representation. Uh, SO,
so I think in some ways philosophers of art
have been marching ahead of us, philosophers of science
in the analysis of representation, and then not surprisingly,
there are quite a number of lessons that we
can pick up from work that was done in
the philosophy of art, um, decades ago and has
been done for some time, and I tried to
do that in, in, in the chapter number 8
in, in my book that Last, the one but
last uh chapter in the book but I um
I go into an in-depth analysis of what philosophers
of art have been saying about representation over the
years, and I try to come up with some
phenomenological lessons for how to understand the practice, um,
from the point of view of the notions of
representation that philosophers of art. I have discussed and,
and I find some very convincing leads there, um,
on ways to inform my own account of scientific
representation. In the work of some prominent and leading
philosophers of art over the last 50 years or
so. And this comes to show that representation is
a Very wide concept in our cognitive lives. It
doesn't just play a role in science. It plays
a role in many other areas of our cognitive
life. It plays a role, prominent role I think
in other aspects. And areas of our culture. Science
is a part of culture, but it's a small
part of culture. And um there's literature, the, the
arts which play a very important role in our
culture and in our cognitive lives, and I think
the concept of representation is just as central there
as it is in science and my account has
a virtue. That are placed generally across. The field,
but in order to apply it to artistic representation,
I have to fill in the notion of surrogative
inference and representational force, um, in different ways to
account for this phenomenological descriptions that philosophers of art
have been giving us for 40 and 50 years,
which I find so insightful and interesting also for
a philosopher of, of science. So, uh yes, I
think there is a connection. Uh, I've done a
lot over the last 20 years to argue, um,
that philosophers of science should pay attention to this
connection, and that it makes us better philosophers of
science when we do. Uh, AT least when it
comes to understanding the concept of representation and how
modeling in science works. It gives us tools and
resources as philosophers of science that we can then
put to work, um, and I, as I mentioned,
I take some of those tools and resources from
the phenomenological tradition in the philosophy of art and
apply them to the study of the practice of
modeling in that chapter, and I, I think that's
one of the chapters that I feel most proud
about because I think what I do there is
definitely very original, and I think it's Uh, breaking
new ground, and I think that new ground really
deserves to be explored, um, and I, I, I
intend to do it in the future. I'm not
the only one. I mean I it has to
be said that there are other philosophers of science
who have been making similar claims. Last 20 years
and where we may have been regarded as a
minority or maybe even a, a bunch of eccentrics
uh 20 years ago. I, I think it's now
widely accepted that it pays to, to look at
the concept of representation across different fields and that
the study of how uh modeling may bear analogies
with what goes on in artistic representation. Uh, CAN
be very fruitful for debates in the philosophy of
science. So, so I, I think this is an
argument that's still being made, but it's already carrying
some weight and has moved people towards considering at
least a legitimate area of study and And I,
uh, well, I take some pride in having, uh,
worked hard to make this change possible and having
been part of this, uh. Reconsideration of the philosophy
of art within the philosophy of science. I think
it's still a very promising area of research.
Great. So the book is again Inference and Representation,
A Study in Modeling Science. I, of course, will
be leaving a link to it in the description
of the interview. And Doctor Suarez, just before we
go, apart from the book, would you like to
tell people where they can find your work on
the internet?
Yes. So, um, I have a personal web page
which is probably the, uh, most complete source of
at least my most up to-date ideas and work.
Um, AND I'm also listed in different kinds of
repositories. There's an institutional page for me at Complutense.
Um, FOR a very long time now, I've been
putting my work in, in open access repositories. Um,
And nowadays I try to get my work to
be published open access. Unfortunately, the book for Chicago
is not open access, um, but, uh, different bits
of it are accessible and of course I'd be
quite happy, um, to respond to any request personally
and send, uh, a PDF copy of my book
or parts of my book as requested. If people
do just send me an email.
Thank you. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Yes, well, thank you, Ricardo. I'm very pleased to
finally have made it, um, into the dissenter. I,
by the way, I want to congratulate you on
the name, um, the dissenter. I, I, I feel
there is a lot of philosophical value in dissent.
And I've always tried to practice it. um, SO
I was uh very taken by the name of
your podcast and I'm glad that we finally made
it. It took us some time to arrange this,
but thank you for having me. Thank you very
much.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognun, Mahel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.